Sannyasa (sa ny sa) is the life stage of renunciation within the Hindu philosophy of four age-based life stages known as ashramas, with the first three being Brahmacharya (bachelor student), Grihastha (householder) and Vanaprastha (forest dweller, retired). Sannyasa is traditionally conceptualized for men or women in late years of their life, but young brahmacharis have had the choice to skip householder and retirement stage, renounce worldly and materialistic pursuits and dedicate their lives to spiritual pursuits (moksha).
Sannyasa is a form of asceticism, is marked by renunciation of material desires and prejudices, represented by a state of disinterest and detachment from material life, and has the purpose of spending one's life in peaceful, love-inspired, simple spiritual life. An individual in Sanyasa is known as a Sannyasi (male) or Sannyasini (female) in Hinduism, which in many ways parallel the Sadhu and Sadhvi traditions of Jain monasticism, the bhikkhus and bhikkhunis of Buddhism and the monk and nun traditions of Christianity, respectively. The fourth stage of a Brahmin's life is usually called Chatruthasharma, indicating Sannyasa.
Sannyasa has historically been a stage of renunciation, ahimsa (non-violence) peaceful and simple life and spiritual pursuit in Indian traditions. However, this has not always been the case. After the invasions and establishment of Muslim rule in India, from the 12th century through the British Raj, parts of the Shaiva and Vaishnava ascetics metamorphosed into a military order, to rebel against persecution, where they developed martial arts, created military strategies, and engaged in guerrilla warfare. These warrior sanyasis (ascetics) played an important role in helping European colonial powers establish themselves in India.



Sa ny sa in Sanskrit means "renunciation of the world" and "abandonment". It is a composite word of sa - which means "together, all", ni- which means "down" and  sa from the root as, meaning "to throw" or "to put". A literal translation of Sanny sa is thus "to put down everything, all of it". Sannyasa is sometimes spelled as Sanyasa.
In Dravidian languages, "sannyasi" is pronounced as "sanyasi" and also "sannasi" in colloquial form. Sanyasis are also known as Bhiksu, Pravrajita/Pravrajit , Yatin, Parivraja/Parivrajaka, Sadhu, Siddha, Sramana, Tyagis and Vairagis.



Jamison and Witzel state early Vedic texts make no mention of Sannyasa, or Ashrama system, unlike the concepts of Brahmacharin and Grihastha which they do mention. Instead, Rig Veda uses the term Antigriha ( ) in hymn 10.95.4, still part of extended family, where older people lived in ancient India, with an outwardly role. It is in later Vedic era and over time, Sannyasa and other new concepts emerged, while older ideas evolved and expanded. A three-stage Ashrama concept along with Vanaprastha emerged about or after 7th Century BC, when sages such as Y j avalkya left their homes and roamed around as spiritual recluses and pursued their Pravrajika (homeless) lifestyle. The explicit use of the four stage Ashrama concept, appeared a few centuries later.
However, early Vedic literature from 2nd millennium BC, mentions Muni ( , monks, mendicants, holy man), with characteristics that mirror those found in later Sannyasins and Sannyasinis. Rig Veda, for example, in Book 10 Chapter 136, mentions mendicants as those with Kesin ( , long haired) and Mala clothes ( , dirty, soil-colored, yellow, orange, saffron) engaged in the affairs of Mananat (mind, meditation). Rigveda, however, refers to these people as Muni and Vati ( , monks who beg).

                                                 
He with the long loose locks (of hair) supports Agni, and moisture, heaven, and earth; He is all sky to look upon: he with long hair is called this light. The Munis, girdled with the wind, wear garments of soil hue; They, following the wind's swift course, go where the Gods have gone before.

These Munis, their lifestyle and spiritual pursuit, likely influenced the Sannyasa concept, as well as the ideas behind the ancient concept of Brahmacharya (bachelor student). One class of Munis were associated with Rudra. Another were Vratyas.




Hinduism has no formal demands nor requireme|nts on the lifestyle or spiritual discipline, method or deity a Sanyasin or Sanyasini must pursue   it is left to the choice and preferences of the individual. This freedom has led to diversity and significant differences in the lifestyle and goals of those who adopt Sannyasa. There are, however, some common themes. A person in Sannyasa lives a simple life, typically detached, itinerant, drifting from place to place, with no material possessions or emotional attachments. They may have a walking stick, a book, a container or vessel for food and drink, often wearing yellow, saffron, orange, ochre or soil colored clothes. They may have long hairs and appear disheveled, and are usually vegetarians. Some minor Upanishads as well as monastic orders consider women, child, students, fallen men (criminal record) and others as not qualified for Sannyasa; while other texts place no restrictions. The dress, the equipage and lifestyle varies between groups. For example, Sannyasa Upanishad in verses 2.23 to 2.29, identifies six lifestyles for six types of renunciates. One of them is described as living with the following possessions,

Pot, drinking cup and flask   the three supports, a pair of shoes,
a patched robe giving protection   in heat and cold, a loin cloth,
bathing drawers and straining cloth, triple staff and coverlet.

Those who enter Sannyasa may choose whether they join a group (mendicant order). Some are anchorites, homeless mendicants preferring solitude and seclusion in remote parts, without affiliation. Others are cenobites, living and traveling with kindred fellow-Sannyasi in the pursuit of their spiritual journey, sometimes in Ashramas or Matha/Sangha (hermitages, monastic order).
Most Hindu ascetics adopt celibacy when they begin Sannyasa. However, there are exceptions, such as the Saiva Tantra school of asceticism where ritual sex is considered part of liberation process. Sex is viewed by them as a transcendence from something personal, intimate to something impersonal, ascetical act.



The goal of the Hindu Sannyasin is moksha (liberation). The idea of what that means varies from tradition to tradition.

Who am I, and in what really do I consist? What is this cage of suffering?

For the Bhakti (devotion) traditions, liberation consists of union with the Divine and release from Sa s ra (rebirth in future life); for Yoga traditions, liberation is the experience of the highest Sam dhi (deep awareness in this life); and for the Advaita tradition, liberation is jivanmukti   the awareness of the Supreme Reality (Brahman) and Self-realization in this life. Sannyasa is a means and an end in itself. It is a means to decreasing and then ultimately ending all ties of any kind. It is a means to the soul and meaning, but not ego nor personalities. Sannyasa does not abandon the society, it abandons the ritual mores of the social world and one's attachment to all its other manifestations. The end is a liberated, content, free and blissful existence.



The behavioral state of a person in Sannyasa is described by many ancient and medieval era Indian texts. Bhagavad Gita discusses it in many verses, for example:

                               - 
He is known as a permanent Sannyasin who does not hate, does not desire, is without dualities (opposites). Truly, Mahabao (Arjuna), he is liberated from bondage.

Other behavioral characteristics, in addition to renunciation, during Sannyasa include: ahimsa (non-violence), akrodha (not become angry even if you are abused by others), disarmament (no weapons), chastity, bachelorhood (no marriage), avyati (non-desirous), amati (poverty), self-restraint, truthfulness, sarvabhutahita (kindness to all creatures), asteya (non-stealing), aparigraha (non-acceptance of gifts, non-possessiveness) and shaucha (purity of body speech and mind). Some Hindu monastic orders require the above behavior in form of a vow, before a renunciate can enter the order. Tiwari notes that these virtues are not unique to Sannyasa, and other than renunciation, all of these virtues are revered in ancient texts for all four Ashramas (stages) of human life.
Baudhayana Dharmas tra, completed by about 7th century BC, states the following behavioral vows for a person in Sannyasa

These are the vows a Sannyasi must keep  
Abstention from injuring living beings, truthfulness, abstention from appropriating the property of others, abstention from sex, liberality (kindness, gentleness) are the major vows. There are five minor vows: abstention from anger, obedience towards the guru, avoidance of rashness, cleanliness, and purity in eating. He should beg (for food) without annoying others, any food he gets he must compassionately share a portion with other living beings, sprinkling the remainder with water he should eat it as if it were a medicine.



Ashrama Upanishad identified various types of Sannyasi renouncers based on their different goals: Kutichaka   seeking atmospheric world; Bahudaka   seeking heavenly world; Hamsa   seeking penance world; Paramahamsa   seeking truth world; and Turiyatitas and Avadhutas seeking liberation in this life.
In some texts, such as Sannyasa Upanishad, these were classified by the symbolic items the Sannyasins carried and their lifestyle. For example, Kutichaka sannyasis carried triple staffs, Hamsa sannyasis carried single staffs, while Paramahamsas went without them. This method of classification based on emblematic items became controversial, as anti-thematic to the idea of renunciation. Later texts, such as Naradaparivrajaka Upanishad stated that all renunciation is one, but people enter the state of Sannyasa for different reasons   for detachment and getting away from their routine meaningless world, to seek knowledge and meaning in life, to honor rites of Sannyasa they have undertaken, and because he already has liberating knowledge.
Other classifications
There were many groups of Hindu, Jain and Buddhist Sannyasis co-existing in pre-Maurya Empire era, each classified by their attributes, such as: Achelakas (without clothes), Ajivika, Aviruddhaka, Devadhammika, Eka-satakas, Gotamaka, Jatilaka, Magandika, Mundasavaka, Nigrantha (Jains), Paribbajaka, Tedandikas, Titthiya and others.



The Dharmas tras and Dharma stras, composed about mid 1st millennium BC and later, place increasing emphasis on all four stages of Ashrama system including Sannyasa. The Baudhayana Dharmas tra, in verses 2.11.9 to 2.11.12, describes the four Ashramas as "a fourfold division of Dharma". The older Dharmas tras, however, are significantly different in their treatment of Ashramas system from the more modern Dharma stras, because they do not limit some of their Ashrama rituals to dvija men, that is, the three varnas   Brahmins, Kshatriyas and Vaishyas. The newer Dharma stra vary widely in their discussion of Ashrama system in the context of classes (castes), with some mentioning it for three, while others such as Vaikh nasa Dharmas tra including all four.
The Dharmas tras and Dharma stras give a number of detailed but widely divergent guidelines on renunciation. In all cases, Sannyasa was never mandatory and was one of the choices before an individual. Only a small percentage chose this path. Olivelle posits that the older Dharmas tras present the Ashramas including Sannyasa as four alternative ways of life and options available, but not as sequential stage that any individual must follow. Olivelle also states that Sannyasa along with the Ashrama system gained mainstream scholarly acceptance about 2nd century BC.
Ancient and medieval era texts of Hinduism consider Grihastha (householder) stage as the most important of all stages in sociological context, as human beings in this stage not only pursue a virtuous life, they produce food and wealth that sustains people in other stages of life, as well as the offsprings that continues mankind. However, an individual had the choice to renounce any time he or she wanted, including straight after student life.



Baudhayana Dharmas tra, in verse II.10.17.2 states that anyone who has finished Brahmacharya (student) life stage may become ascetic immediately, in II.10.17.3 that any childless couple may enter Sannyasa anytime they wish, while verse II.10.17.4 states that a widower may choose Sannyasa if desired, but in general, states verse II.10.17.5, Sannyasa is suited after the completion of age 70 and after one's children have been firmly settled. Other texts suggest the age of 75.
The Vasi ha and  pastamba Dharmas tras, and the later Manusm ti describe the  ramas as sequential stages which would allow one to pass from Vedic studentship to householder to forest-dwelling hermit to renouncer. However, these texts differ with each other. Y j avalkya Sm ti, for example, differs from Manusm ti and states in verse 3.56 that one may skip Vanaprastha (forest dwelling, retired) stage and go straight from the Grihastha (householder) stage to Sannyasa.



The question as to which va a may, or may not, renounce is never explicitly stated in ancient or medieval dharma literature, the more modern Dharma stras texts discuss much of renunciation stage in context of dvija men. Nevertheless, Dharma stra texts document people of all castes as well as women, entered Sannyasa in practice.



After renouncing the world, the ascetic's financial obligations and property rights were dealt by the state, just like a dead person. Vi u Smriti in verse 6.27, for example, states that if a debtor takes Sannyasa, his sons or grandsons should settle his debts. As to the little property a Sannyasin may collect or possess after renunciation, Book III Chapter XVI of Kautiliya's Arthasastra states that the property of hermits (v naprastha), ascetics (yati, sannyasa), and student bachelors (Brahmach ri) shall on their death be taken by their guru, disciples, their dharmabhratri (brother in the monastic order), or classmates in succession.
While the renouncer's obligations and property rights were reassigned, the Sannyasi or Sannyasini continued to enjoy basic human rights such as the protection from injury by others and freedom of movement, by the state. For example, stealing from, harming or killing a human being in Sannyasa was a crime in Kautiliya's Arthasastra.



Later Indian literature debates whether moksha (liberation), the benefit of renunciation can be achieved, without asceticism, at earlier stages of one's life. Bhagavad Gita, Vidyaranya's Jivanmukti Viveka and others, for example, dedicate a significant section on various alternate forms of yoga, the importance of yogic discipline, considered as paths to spirituality and liberation. Over time, four paths to liberating spirituality have emerged in Hinduism: J na yoga, Bhakti yoga, Karma yoga and R ja yoga. Acting without greed or craving for results, in Karma yoga for example, is considered a form of detachment in daily life similar to Sannyasa. Sharma states that, "the basic principle of Karma yoga is that it is not what one does, but how one does it that counts and if one has the know-how in this sense, one can become liberated by doing whatever it is one does", and "(one must do) whatever one does without attachment to the results, with efficiency and to the best of one's ability".



Ascetic life was historically a life of renunciation, non-violence and spiritual pursuit. However, in India, this has not always been the case. For example, after the Mongol and Persian Islamic invasions in the 12th century, and the establishment of Delhi Sultanate, the ensuing Hindu-Muslim conflicts provoked the creation of a military order of Hindu ascetics in India. These warrior Ascetics, formed paramilitary groups called  Akharas  and they invented a range of martial arts.
Nath Siddhas of the 12th century AD, may have been the earliest Hindu monks to resort to a military response after the Muslim conquest. Ascetics, by tradition, led a nomadic and unattached lifestyle. As these ascetics dedicated themselves to rebellion, their groups sought stallions, developed techniques for spying and targeting, and they adopted strategies of war against Muslim nobles and the Sultanate state. Many of these groups were devotees of Hindu deity Mahadeva, and were called Mahants. Other popular names for them was Sannyasis, Yogis, Nagas (followers of Shiva), Bairagis (followers of Vishnu) and Gosains from 1500 to 1800 AD; in some cases, these Hindu monks cooperated with Muslim fakirs who were Sufi and also persecuted.
Warrior monks continued their rebellion through the Mughal Empire, and became a political force during the early years of British Raj. In some cases, these regiments of soldier monks shifted from guerrilla campaigns to war alliances, and these Hindu warrior monks played a key role in helping British establish themselves in India. The significance of warrior ascetics rapidly declined with the consolidation of British Raj in late 19th century, and with the rise in non-violence movement by Mahatma Gandhi.
Novetzke states that some of these Hindu Warrior Ascetics were treated as folk heroes, aided by villagers and townspeople, because they targeted figures of political and economic power in a discriminatory state, and some of these warriors paralleled Robin Hood's lifestyle.



Of the 108 Upanishads of the Muktika, the largest corpus is dedicated to Sannyasa, or 23 are considered Sannyasa Upanishads. These are as follows:
Of the 23 Sannyasa Upanishads, Robert Hume included Maitr ya i Upanishad among his list of "Thirteen Principal Upanishads" of Hinduism. It starts with the question, "given the nature of life, how is joy possible?" and "how can one achieve moksha (liberation)?"; in later sections it offers a debate on possible answers and its views on Sannyasa.

In this body infected with passions, anger, greed, delusion, fright, despondency, grudge, separation from what is dear and desirable, attachment to what is not desirable, hunger, thirst, old age, death, illness, sorrow and the rest - how can one experience only joy?   Hymn I.3
The drying up of great oceans, the crumbling down of the mountains, the instability of the pole-star, the tearing of the wind-chords, the sinking down, the submergence of the earth, the tumbling down of the gods from their place - in a world in which such things occur, how can one experience only joy ?!   Hymn I.4

Dragged away and polluted by the river of the Gunas (personality), one becomes rootless, tottering, broken down, greedy, uncomposed and falling in the delusion of I-consciousness, he imagines: "I am this, this is mine" and binds himself, like a bird in the net.   Hymn VI.30
Just as the fire without fuel comes to rest in its place,
so also the passive mind comes to rest in its source;
When it (mind) is infatuated by the objects of sense, he falls away from truth and acts;
Mind alone is the Samsara, one should purify it with diligence;
You are what your mind is, a mystery, a perpetual one;
The mind which is serene, cancels all actions good and bad;
He, who, himself, serene, remains steadfast in himself - he attains imperishable happiness.   Hymn VI.34




Adi Shankara (8th century CE)
Sri Sureshwaracharya (8th century CE)
Vishnuswami (?)
Ramanujacharya (1017-1137)
Brahmatantra Swatantra Jeeyar (1268-1368)
Manavala Mamunigal (1370 1443)
Madhvacharya (c. 1238-1317)
Vidyaranya (1268-1386)
Jayatirtha (c. 1365-1388)
Narasimha Saraswati (1378-1459)
Vyasatirtha (1460-1539)
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu (1486-1533)
Vadirajatirtha (1480-1600)
Raghavendra Swami (1595-1671)
Potuluri Virabrahmendra Swami (1608-1693)
Totapuri (1780-?)
Vasudevananda Saraswati (1854-1914)
Yukteswar Giri (1855-1936)
Sree Narayana Guru (1855-1928)
Sri Sacchidananda Shivabhinava Nrusimha Bharati (1858-1912)
Swami Vivekananda (1863-1902)
Rama Tirtha (1873-1906)
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati (1874-1937)
Ramana Maharshi (1879-1950)
Swami Sivananda (1887-1963)
Sahajanand Saraswati (1889-1950)
Chandrashekhara Bharati (1892-1954)
Paramahansa Yogananda (1893-1952)
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada (1896-1977) disciple of Bhaktisiddhanta
Chandrashekarendra Saraswati (Maha Periyava) (1894-1994)
Swami Ranganathananda (1908-2005)
Swami Akhandanand Saraswati (1911-1987)
Swami Chinmayananda (1916-1993)
Sri Abhinava Vidyatirtha (1917-1989)
Swami Satyananda Saraswati (1923-2009)
Sathyananda Saraswathi (1935-2006)
Neem Karoli Baba (?-1973)







Cited books:
Olivelle, Patrick (1993). The Ashrama System: The History and Hermeneutics of a Religious Institution (OCLC 466428084). Oxford University Press. 



Articles on aspects of Sannyasa, Vairagya, and Brahmacharya
'The Song of the Sannyasin', poem by Swami Vivekananda
Vows Of Sannyasa Saiva Siddhanta - Example covenant between a Hindu Sannyasin and a Hindu Monastic Order (PDF download)